# Exploring Git, chapter 1

## Where to start?

Looking at git-1.7.8.3. Those are major, minor, minor-minor, and
minor-minor-minor version numbers. Sheesh. 

## Browsing

Using `gvim` with the NERDTree plugin. Let's start at the README. 

## README

Irreverent, slightly self-deprecating tone. No need to be formal if you're good
enough. Mostly contains references to documentation for end users. The only
clue for hackers is a reference to the mailing list.

Since we haven't been left many clues about where to begin and the source tree
is huge, let's continue by checking out all of the documentation-related files.
Since this is C and CamelCase isn't around, let's `grep` for everything that has
an uppercase letter in it: 

    broderick git-1.7.8.3 $ ls -1 | grep -e "[A-Z]\+"
    COPYING
    Documentation
    GIT-VERSION-GEN
    INSTALL
    LGPL-2.1
    Makefile
    README
    RelNotes

Ooohh. "Documentation" looks like a good pick.

## Documentation

This is a treasure-trove of shit. I spot a folder named *technical*, which
sounds promising. I first, mostly on whim, check out `howto-index.sh`. Looks
like a shell script that prints a message then exits. 

After examining the content, I test that `grep` returns 1 if it doesn't find the
pattern you give it. It does; cool! Looks as though `howto-index.sh` is supposed
to be a utility for indexing mailing-list postings and printing titles and
abstracts for people who've posted about how they use git. 

Now reading `Documentation/howto/maintain-git.txt`. Post from Junio on how to be
the maintainer of git should he himself be "struck down by a wayward bus."
Interestingly, he says that a maintainer's time is spent 

  - 60% on communication,
  - 30% on integration, and
  - 10% on development.

An explanation of the structure of the git repo is explained in the context of
releases and maintenance.

### Side-tracked

I see a usage of `git am` and run `git help am`. It is a way to apply patches
from mail messages. While I'm at it, I check out `git log -p`: that generates a
patch from the log. 

I wonder about finding a tool that will generate colored diffs on the
commandline.

### `Documentation/technical`

Exploring `api-index.sh`. Some more bash stuff, looks like it builds out the
`api-index.txt` file. I assume these shell scripts are here as an easy way of
indexing new pieces of mail that are attached as documentation. Pretty smart.

Slick bash pattern encountered: 

    ls api-*.txt |
    while read filename
    do
            case "$filename" in
            api-index-skel.txt | api-index.txt) continue ;;
            esac
            title=$(sed -e 1q "$filename")
            html=${filename%.txt}.html
            echo "* link:$html[$title]"
    done
    echo "$c"
    sed -n -e '/^\/\/ table of contents end/,$p' "$skel"


The plus at the end of the filename is just for filename differentiation from
the current `api-index.txt` and isn't a special redirection directive. Learned
about `test`, which is a good way of making conditional checking more
readable...  it effectively hides the "0 is true, 1 is false" aberration that
makes bash confusing after working in other programming languages.

Looks like this is generating an
[AsciiDoc](http://www.methods.co.nz/asciidoc)-friendly format.

### `Documentation/technical-api-allocation-growing.txt`

I pick this out of the blue, just for a sample of what these technical docs are
all about. First line: 

    Dynamically growing an array using realloc() is error prone and boring.

Awesome. I look up `realloc` in K&R; it's used for dynamically changing the
size of an object (expanding *and* contracting). 

File gives a sample usage of some macro that ostensibly wraps `realloc`, but has
the user manually maintain two additional variables that indicate cardinality. 

### Further browsing of `Documentation/technical`

One of the things I'm noticing here is that many of these bits of doc establish
conventions for doing things that, were git being written in a higher-level
language like Python, would be taken care of (and mostly dictated by) the
standard library. For example, opening subprocesses (api-run-command.txt),
managing lists of strings (api-string-list.txt). 

I bet that between large C projects, there is a lot of redundancy in reinventing
this stuff. I also bet that there exist C libraries for doing this sort of thing
--- I wonder why git isn't making use of those? 

### Later

I'll come back to these documents as needed; I'm sure they'll serve useful as I
get deeper into the actual code.

## What I learned in Chapter 1

  - A bunch of mail files and a few shell scripts makes pretty good
    documentation. That's reuse if I've ever seen it.

  - Git reinvents a lot of the code that you'd get for free in a higher-level
    language (argument intake, string storage, subprocess-management). I wonder
    why git wasn't written in "layers" of languages, only dropping into C (or
    Cython or something) at the bottlenecks. I am eager to see how much code was
    actually devoted to these things and how readable the C is.

  - Bash can be more readable than I thought it could.

